# MIT Green Labs Innovation Award Proposal
Submitted by Daniel J. Preston and Ariel S. Anders 
On behalf of the Device Research Laboratory under the guidance of Professor Evelyn N. Wang

### Executive Summary
We implemented a full-lab energy use monitoring network which is capable of providing data in real time and also logging for later analysis.  We propose that this lab space be used to test the efficacy of various “green” schemes such as posting signage, appointment of a lab energy officer, or even a chime that reminds users to turn off lights as they leave.  The energy monitoring system will provide quantitative results as to whether these methods lead to energy savings and which are the most effective.

###Initial Project Implementation with Seed Funding

We tested our energy consumption monitoring system within room 7-021, which we envision as a test lab to determine the efficacy of different energy conservation methods, knowledge which we will disseminate to help other labs decide which measures to use.  This concept of a test lab is discussed in detail in the following section; here, we describe how we have transformed the lab into an Internet of Things (IoT) where all of the energy consuming devices in the lab are monitored in real time and the data is also logged for later analysis.

We have purchased and installed a dedicated wireless network within our lab that communicates with plug-level energy monitoring devices called Wemo switches, shown in Figure 1.  These Wemo switches are plugged directly into outlets and then lab equipment is plugged into the Wemo switches where the power consumption (solid yellow lines in Figure 1) is measured; the Wemo switches then send power consumption data over the wireless network (dashed blue lines in Figure 1) to our server in real time, where the data is recorded.  In addition to the live energy consumption visualization, the Wemo switches can be used to turn off lab equipment that has been left on by accident from a remote location – for example, a user could shut down a furnace that they forgot to switch off even after they have left campus and gone home.  However, the Wemo switches are limited to devices which plug into wall outlets, which excludes large energy consumers such as overhead lighting and fume hoods.  We were particularly interested in monitoring the energy consumed by these devices because it is very easy to save energy without changing lab operation; for example, while an experiment may always need to use a certain amount of energy to achieve a desired result, simply shutting the fume hood sash and turning off the lights when leaving the room is not an inconvenience and saves a large amount of power (~4 kW savings when closing the fume hood and ~1 kW savings when turning off all of the overhead lights).  Unfortunately, it is difficult to monitor the energy consumption of these devices without significant maintenance for new instrumentation installation, and in some cases (like overhead lighting), MIT Facilities is not currently offering this service.  Therefore, we took energy monitoring into our own hands and installed Wemo cameras on our wireless network.  These cameras can record live video of things like light switches (dashed green line in Figure 1).  Live video of light switches is useful because it contains the data that shows whether the lights are on or off.  Humans can easily look at a video of a light switch and determine whether it is on (up) or off (down).  It is not quite so easy for computers to do this, but we wrote custom image processing software that is able to look at the light switches through the camera video feed and within ±15% of the real power consumption depending on the ballast factor), we are able to log how much power is being consumed by overhead lighting in real time.  A similar image processing method is used for fume hoods, either by observing the energy consumption gage on their flow meters or by observing the status (open/closed) of the sash.  

With the system installed and running in our lab, we began to gather data. This experiment consisted of three main energy consuming devices: light to visualize a sample, a plasma cleaner to clean the sample, and a heater.  We see in the power consumption plot (left) that the heaters require the most power by far at over 1,000 W.  The plasma cleaner requires just under half of that, around 400 W, and the lighting requires only about 100 W.  However, when we integrate the data to determine the actual total energy used, we find that the heaters consumed less than 10% of the energy.  The lighting and plasma cleaner consumed about the same amount of energy, 30 kWh.  

This type of analysis is incredibly useful in determining what may initially be non-intuitive patterns in energy consumption.  In addition, this particular case was useful because it illustrated that leaving the light on during the whole experiment even though it only needed to be on when visualizing the sample (about 5% of the total time) was consuming nearly half of the total energy used – turning off the lighting when not in use therefore reduced the energy consumption of this experimental procedure by ≈50%.  


